you know, beyond their most productive years except maybe Horace Byers, but he had the attitude that we can hire anybody.
At least we ought to go after them.
And I think that's one of the things that changed the culture here was the attitude we could hire people.
And if A&M is going to become a great university, we've got to do that.
I mean, that's our way to become a great university.
Did you get any of that philosophy in that interview with Mr. Rudder?
No.
No, no, no.
You just saw it.
I mean, you saw it in that kind of people.
And he made some...
He either got some bad advice, he made some bad hires.
People that he thought were really great academicians were con men or whatever.
I don't know, they were bust.
And I won't name them, but you know who they were.
Well, who were the key positive ones?
Well, Horace Byers was a key positive, I think.
Van Overby was a key positive.
You're talking too long ago but, and Jack Williams I think followed up on that and of course Jack Williams was more an academician and he would maybe be able to recruit people better than Mr. Rutter.
But anyway I think there was an attitude created back starting with Mr. Rutter and continued with Williams
that we ought to be out looking for the top people and we ought to be trying to bring in people from other universities and we shouldn't put self-imposed limitations on ourselves.
So as a result of that sort of attitude, I think, and making money available so you could compete on, you know, good people.
Now one of the unsung heroes I've always thought during the, in this kind of effort was Wayne Hall.
Yeah, yeah.
Did you have any connection with him?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Wayne Hall was, yeah, he was a colleague when he was head of the Department of Plant Sciences and Wayne was a good scientist and he,
He appreciated good science and then he became provost and he was very supportive.
And they made funding available so you could be competitive and they tried to help you recruit top people.
Now you ask if we had gotten any national programs.
Well in the late, when I became department head then I cultivated a friendship with a lot of other department heads because I wanted to recruit
And I wanted people to come here.
So in addition to doing that, I got funds for lecturers, bring lecturers here so they could see what we're trying to do and go back.
But I had a very close relationship developed with Ray Smith, who was head of UC Berkeley in the Moms Department, and Hal Reynolds, who was head of UC Riverside.
Because California, a lot of their,
problems were very similar to ours.
And when Nixon decided that they were going to have to ban DDT, he was under a lot of pressure from the environmentalists to ban DDT, but he was under counter pressure from the farm organizations to
not banned DDT.
So he was sort of caught and damned if he did and damned if he didn't.
But in that process, there was a person in the National Science Foundation that we had worked with on some smaller programs, and he said, I think there's an opportunity
that you could put together a large national program under the auspices of the International Biological Programs, IBP, and you could get White House support if you could develop a program for alternative methods of crop protection.
If DDT is going to go out, then the president's got to say to the farmers, we're going to ban DDT, but in the process we're going to fund a lot of research to develop alternative methods.
So he approached people at Berkeley, not me, but anyway.
Ray Smith called me and he said,
We've got an opportunity to put together a large national program and we've got good support in National Science Foundation where this person worked.
If we could put together a coalition and why don't we do that?
I said, hell, let's do it.
Let's, you know, we can do it.
So we got together four or five people and met in a hotel room at Berkeley and decided we'd put together a large national program.
This is about when?
It was 1970, 71.
And so we developed a scientific program, and then through my relationships with the cotton growers, Mr. Mahon was chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, but he was from Lubbock, Texas, area of the biggest cotton production center of the world.
So we were able to get some people there that he respected to say we got to do something and these guys have got the program.
So whenever their funding comes up, it would be good if you'd help us, which you did.
But anyway, when the White House announced the ban on DDT, they also announced the alternative program
a research program for alternative chemicals.
And that was the largest agricultural research program, a single program, I guess, at its time.
And we had a prime place to play in that.
A&M did.
Who were the other major players?
What schools?
Berkeley and Riverside and A&M, LSU, Michigan State, Cornell,
University of Arkansas was involved in Florida, North Carolina State.
So kind of a Big Ten?
Yeah, yeah.
Eight or ten schools?
Yeah, we had 12 at that time.
So that program was funded for five years and it was very successful.
And it was headed by a fellow at Berkeley named Carl Huffaker.
And then Carl was a scientist and a good one, but he was not a program manager.
And when it ended, then we decided we'd go for a second program, and they asked me to head it.
And we put together one that was even larger called the Consortium Integrated Pest Management, and it went from 19
77 or somewhere at 86.
And as a result of that we had leadership here, had high visibility, had large funding, and it put our department in the center.
And a lot of our guys I had hired who are now five, six, seven, eight years in their career
And as a result of the success of that, we were able to develop a similar program, the one in crops for southern pine beetle.
Leadership was here.
Tom Payne, I recruited for, he's now dean at Columbia, that I recruited from Riverside.
We developed a similar one for mosquitoes.
leadership here of Jim Olsen I had recruited from University of Illinois.
And so we had all these large national projects going on with most of the leadership, project leaders sitting right here.
You're talking about the great successes.
Was there any that didn't work out like y'all had hoped?
So a pretty good batting average.
Yeah.
Accountability was, we had, as part of the program we promised accountability.
that we would demonstrate accountability, and we'd demonstrate that our program would be better than what the farmers are already doing.
So we brought in the ag economists to do those evaluations, and they all worked.
Did the Greenpeace extremists ever become a problem?
No.
Well, we had better support.
out of the environmental group politically than we had out of the people who would be blind with the chemical companies, including some of the national commodity organizations.
Does Mr. Teague deserve any credit?
Mr. Teague was very helpful at the beginning, and of course his career ended before we got finished, and Mr. Mahon,
Both were very, very helpful.
All right.
Did Phil Graham, while he was in the house, did he have any role?
Yes, before he was involved.
Now, while you're doing all this in research, were you still teaching and directing some graduate students?
At the beginning, I was not teaching.
When I became department head, I quit teaching scheduled classes.
What had you been teaching?
I'd been teaching one course a year.
I taught insect ecology, the 400 level course every spring.
But I was hired here as a researcher and experiment station.
So my teaching responsibilities, except for graduate students, always had a large graduate student program.
I had the largest in the department.
About how many?
Well, I'd have 10 to 12.
Masters and PhD?
Mostly PhD.
Mostly.
Yeah.
And so I had a large graduate student program all the time I was here, but I just, I had teaching responsibilities in the spring, one course.
What were your, of those doctoral students, what were some of the topics that they worked on that give you greatest pride now?
Well, one of them just received the Distinguished Teaching Award at the University of Arkansas.
I just wrote him a letter.
Congratulations.
He got it at the commencement the other day, Max Meisch, and he's a mosquito control expert up there now, but he worked on the,
on a cropping problem.
I have several that's gone on and done well.
Did you, were these students from all across the country or were they usually?
No, at the time I was involved mostly, most of our students were from Texas.
Right.
And we had some, we had some drawing power in Louisiana and occasionally Arkansas.
Arkansas sent most of their students to Cornell and Kansas State.
We had quite a few from Oklahoma State, quite a few from Louisiana, and then eventually we started picking them up from some of the schools where we recruited from faculty members like Michigan and Purdue and places like that.
They never got many students out of California, for example.
In the 60s and 70s, was it difficult for a student from out of town to a graduate student to adjust to College Station and A&M?
I don't think so.
We had a, you know, at that time part was pretty small and faculty members spent a lot of time with students, had them in their homes and,
managed and looked after them.
They had family problems and stuff.
We looked there for our students.
So I think they adjusted pretty well.
Think how much more personal everything was then than now.
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I'm telling you, yeah.
Very, very different.
It was, it, the pressure is now on faculty members out here are,
Or hard.
It's hard.
Yes, yes, yes.
Back to Mr. Rudder.
As this program is making progress, did you have the impression that Mr. Rudder was aware of the progress you all were making?
Well, Mr. Rudder died.
About the time we really, about shortly after, what year did he die in?
Spring of 1970.
See, I'd been department head three years, so he died before we got this really large national project underway.
Jack Williams was president.
He became aware.
Were you, for Rudder, just a second, were you at all aware of any health problems Mr. Rudder was having?
Please share any of that.
I remember...
going to a function, a faculty function of some kind, going home and saying to Frances, Mr. Rutter's having some problems.
And she said, what do you mean?
I said, one, he's gotten too heavy, and two,
He was either drunk or under tranquilizers.
And I want to think it's tranquilizers because his speech was a little bit slurred.
And I think he's under medication from the strain.
I think the job is killing him.
And not long after that, we went to a function at Briarcrest, and he was there.
and said some, I don't know what the function was, but he made some comments and the same thing.
I said, Francis, Mr. Rudder's not right.
I said, you know, the job's killing him.
And I said, notice his speech.
And he's too astute.
He's not going to be coming here drunk.
He's under some kind of medication.
It's high blood pressure or tranquilizers or something, and he's too big.
And wham, I came in from, I had been to Washington, and I came in, and they said he'd had a stroke or a heart, did he have a stroke or a heart attack?
I think heart and then kidney failure.
Okay.
Well, he hadn't died when I came in, but I remember going to the administration building to talk to Harry, and he said, well, Mr. Rudder is in really bad shape, and he'd had a heart attack, I guess, and that they don't expect him to live, and he didn't.
He didn't live.
And I went home, and I said, Francis?
Mr. Rudder gave his life.
This job killed him.
It killed him.
And I believe that right now.
It killed him, killed Jack Williams.
When Mr. Rudder died, I believe General Ludeke was the interim.
Yeah.
Did that have any effect on you and scholars like you at the working level?
Did Ludeke change anything, better or worse?
I've had an opportunity for some reason to go visit with him.
Oh, describe that.
And it mainly, we had outgrown our space and Tom Payne had been working down in the Sour Lake area on the southern pine beetle and we had bought a mobile home and had it outfitted as a,
lab, field lab.
So Tom wanted to move that, he completed that work and he was, had no space.
He needed a place from graduate students.
So he came and he said, I want to move that moment home back to, I want to move it to the campus.
And I said, well Tom, we'll have to get sewer hook up and that's fine, but I'll have to, let me check on it and see what we got to do.
Well right away I found out
that you had to have the president's approval to put a mobile home on this campus.
So I, of course, had to talk to Harry and, or Jarvis, whoever.
And I said, well, Tom's got to, we got to move that mobile home and I've got a good place to put it where it'd be out of sight.
behind these Quonset buildings and you couldn't see it from anywhere in the road.
And we got to have that space.
Tom's got to have it."
So they said, well, you have to go see General Ludicke.
Okay.
Is it okay if I make an appointment?
Yeah, you just make an appointment and go up and talk to him.
And so I called, and he had a very nice lady that was his secretary.
He may eventually become his wife.
After his wife died.
Yeah, after his wife died.
She was a nice person.
I called her and said, I understand that I have to have General Ludicke's permission about moving a mobile home, which is a research trailer.
So I'd like to get, talk to him about that, come see him.
So I made an appointment.
He called me on the phone, and he said, well, yes, I want to see where you want to put it, so why don't you come and pick me up, come to my office, and take me and show me where you want to put this and what you're going to do with it.
So I did.
Got him, brought him out here.
That trailer may still be sitting over there.
And I showed him what we wanted to do and why we needed to do it.
And I said, you know, General Ludicke, we don't have enough space for our people.
I've got people working these old Quonset buildings.
They're working in that machine shed that's a tool shed.
And these are laboratories.
We got student, graduate students.
And, you know, if we had the facilities, we wouldn't need this.
But I don't have the facilities, so we got to make do.
So he said, well, you can do it.
Put it in that spot where you told me it's out of sight, and that's fine.
And that day on, he called me Perry, and we had a real good relationship.
When I became chancellor, he became a member of my Century Council, but I found him to be
Pleasant.
Surprised.
What a little I ran into him, I found him to be very direct.
Very businesslike.
Businesslike.
Do it.
Get on with it.
This is a sidelight that has nothing to do with the purpose of our conversation.
I got to sit next to him on an A&M plane going to a coordinating board meeting in Corpus Christi.
and got him to talking about what it was like to be an Air Force pilot or Army Air Corps pilot in the early 30s because he couldn't get a job as an engineer.
Everything was broke, so he goes in the Air Corps.
And for a brief time, they had to fly the air mail because the airlines went on strike, and he would be handed
a big sack of mail, and they would tell you, okay, take this to Oklahoma City, and they handed you a highway map.
And he said you'd fly low to see on the water tower what town it was.
But that was delightful.
All right, then he's replaced by Dr. Williams.
When did you first have any interaction with him?
I don't remember.
What year did he come here?
He comes in the fall, November 1, 70.
70.
Rudder dies that spring.
General Ludeke then is interim president for president and chancellor because there was the jobs.
Okay, so Williams came in 1970.
Mm-hmm.
Okay.
November 1.
Yeah.
I can't remember her first meeting for Williams.
As it turns out, my wife was playing golf at that time because her daughter was in school, in high school, and she became a friend of Margaret Williams and they played a lot of golf together.
And the first time I really remember meeting
him on a personal basis, although I knew who he was and I met him in, you know, official functions, but he invited us to their house one Sunday and he'd invited some other people and I think I was invited because I'd been invited to go to China on the
I was on the second team that went into China in 1975, a group of ten entomologists.
And they invited us over there because that was, the team was formed the previous year.
So somewhere along there, Haskell was the first time I got to personally know him on a more personal basis.
Describe him as you saw his personality and his manner.
I thought Jack Williams was one, he's very outgoing, most articulate person, one of the most articulate people I ever met, his most articulate president, he and Frank Vandiver, we ever had here.
And a person who understood academia and the politics around it and who appreciated
Quality people.
I think he had appreciation of quality people and had a keen sense of humor, although I have heard that he also had a bad temper, but I never did see that side.
I never did either, but I'd heard that.
I've heard that report, but I've not heard anybody yet give me some specific examples.
Yeah, yeah.
I don't know, but anyway.
Had you ever been invited to the president's home before the Williams?
I was never invited to the Rudders.
Nor us.
The first, when we were there, we were invited one of those evenings.
When I walked in, I was going, ooh and ah, how beautiful.
Mrs. Williams said, I don't know where you live.
I don't know what it looks like, but I'll swap with you even right now.
And I said, oh, why?
And she said, because this is not ours.
She said, anything I do, somebody second guesses.
Describe what you think was the general feeling on the campus in the Rudder and Williams years about what was happening at A&M.
Well, I don't think that Rudder was, he was not extremely
popular among the faculty members who had come from other places.
Now, and it may be I'm just drawing, I don't have a small sample, but the people that I knew, which mostly in the College of Agriculture who had gained PhDs at other universities, he was not real popular.
And I think that was true among a number of faculty.
He was not real popular, I don't think, in the liberal arts.
And the criticisms were he doesn't have a PhD, can't make a decent speech, he's not articulate, and he's just not a good representative of faculty.
And that was sort of the prevailing sentiment.
Now, after he died, and he's too autocratic.
We don't have any shared governance.
We don't, you know, he doesn't listen to the faculty.
He's just too autocratic.
But see, after he died, he's everybody's hero because they see his accomplishments.
And what I've discovered, I can tell you this, I've discovered that people at A&M, and it's probably true at other universities,
They don't like, at the time, a benevolent dictator.
They have lots of criticism of benevolent dictators, but after the benevolent dictators are gone, they appreciate them and wish they had them back.
And why?
Because a benevolent dictator, one will treat you all right, but they'll make a decision.
They'll have to refer to all kinds of committees and procrastinate about it.
And the biggest complaint I hear among people around here is
about the years.
You can't get a decision.
Well, it's one thing you could get out of Rutter, you could get a decision.
What did you think was the general opinion as Mr. Rutter was leading the changes of co-education, non-compulsory core, racial integration?
Well, see, I was not an Aggie, so I'm not emotionally involved.
What did the people around you think?
I think in this department, for the most part, most of them thought that was a progressive move.
I think although we had a lot of people who had been in the Corps who graduated from here thought that they could see the handwriting on the wall and that
the university was not going to grow, it was losing enrollment, and could see that changes had to be made.
I think our department of people recognized that right away.
The other thing is that
Mr. Rutter, of course, gets all this credit and Sterling Evans, but there is also another body working at the time called U.S.
Supreme Court.
And if these changes hadn't been made voluntarily, they would have been forced.
And the handwriting was already on the wall that there were curriculums including entomology that's not offered in any other university in the state, that those are going to have to come open.
So,
I give Mr. Rudder and Sterling their due deference for all that.
But at the same time, 1964 was the year they integrated the schools.
The Supreme Court, I've got the name of that case, it was hanging out there on everybody's head.
But I think everybody in our department thought those were
Good changes and thought the core situation was stifling things.
What about Dr. Williams?
How did the, what was the general attitude you sensed about him among your colleagues?
Well, people respected Jack Williams and the faculty and they liked him.
I mean, he typified what you want in a university president.
I remember one time saying to some people, Lloyd Benson came here and made a stop campaigning for Chet Edwards or somebody, I don't know who, but he, Pete Gehring, they made a stop at the airport.
And some people were saying, well, that's the first time they'd seen him.
They said, you know, what a courtly man.
I said, if you were typecasting a senator, if you wanted to typecast a senator for a movie or something,
You couldn't beat Lloyd Vinson.
I mean, he was always a gentleman, always courtly, well-dressed, nice appearance.
And the same about Jack Williams.
You're going to typecast the university president.
You couldn't beat Jack Williams.
For you as a department head, did the routine of getting things done change under Williams from what it had been under Rudder?
if you needed to get?
Well, in the ag school,